# Power & Sample Size Estimation in R

## Goal of Software Lesson 7
::: {.graybox}

The goal of this software lesson is to learn how to

* estimate a sample size for a study comparing two means by specifying the power value, the significance level, and the estimated effect size, and
* estimate the power of a study comparing two means by specifying the sample size, the significance level, and the estimated effect size.

:::
<br>

## Power and Sample Size Calculations

An important step in doing research is determining the appropriate sample size for a given study. When figuring this out, you must consider Type I error, power, and cost. Two particular cases will be described in this lesson:  

1. Compute the appropriate sample size given a specified power.

2. Calculate the power given a specific sample size. 

Note: Most of the time, research deals with comparing groups. Thus, this lesson will focus on the two-sample situation comparing means, but it is possible to compute power and sample size for the two other situations you have learned about in this class: a single variable (i.e., one-sample) or for paired data.

The following four values have a close relationship with one another: 

1. Sample size

2. Effect size (i.e., quantifying the difference between two groups)

3. Significance level, $\alpha$

4. Power

If you know three of the four, you can determine the fourth quantity.

### Sample size estimation

Suppose researchers want to estimate the sample size for a study where they are comparing two group means. They want to have $80\%$ power, assume an effect size of 0.4, and set the significance level at 0.05. 

- To calculate a sample size estimate prior to a study that will compare two group means, use the `pwr.t.test()` function from the `{pwr}` package, specifying effect size (`d=`), power (`power=`), significance level (`sig.level=`), and type of *t*-test (`type=`):


``` r
#############
# Run the install.packages() function once per package
#############
install.packages("pwr")

###Access the package using the library() function
library(pwr)

####Estimate the sample size
pwr.t.test(d=0.4, power=0.8, sig.level = 0.05, type = "two.sample")
```

The output will provide you with an estimated sample size (`n = `) as well as each of the inputs that you provided in the `pwr.t.test()` function (i.e., `d = `, `sig.level = `, `power = `, and `alternative = `). 

For *t*-tests, the effect size is computed using the following formula: 

$d = \frac{|\mu_1 - \mu_2|}{\sigma}$, 

where $\mu_1$ = mean of "group 1", $\mu_2$ = mean of "group 2", and $\sigma$ = standard deviation. 

One guideline for how to evaluate effect size values (e.g., `d`) is: 0.2 is small, 0.5 is medium, and 0.8 is large. 

For more information about effect sizes, see the following website: <a href="https://www.leeds.ac.uk/educol/documents/00002182.htm">It's the Effect Size, Stupid: What effect size is and why it is important.</a>

The `type=` argment is set at `"two.sample"` to indicate that you are comparing two (independent) groups. The other two options for the `type=` argument are `"paired"` (when you are comparing a mean change from paired data) and `"one.sample"` (when you are testing a single mean).

Lastly, there is another argument, `alternative=`, that can be specified in the function. This argument indicates the direction of alternative hypothesis: two-sided, greater than, or less than. The default is a two-sided (`alternative = "two.sided"`), but you could also set the alternative to be `"less"` or `"greater"`.

::: {.bluebox}
**SAMPLE SIZE ESTIMATION**

<b>Purpose:</b> To calculate the optimum number of participants required in a sample so that true inferences about the population are able to be made based on the results that were obtained. This calculation should be done prior to conducting a study. 
<br>

For more information about sample size estimation, see this article: <a href="https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2876926/">Sample Size Calculation</a>
<br>
<div style="border-bottom: 1px dashed black"></div>
<br>

For additional R resources on sample size estimation, see: 

* <a href="https://www.statmethods.net/stats/power.html">Power Analysis [Quick-R].</a>
* <a href="https://publicifsv.sund.ku.dk/~tag/Teaching/share/R-tutorials/Basic-statistics/Power.html">R-tutorial: Power and Sample Size Calculation [Kansas University].</a>

:::
<br>

## GUIDED QUESTIONS {#g71}

##### Question 1
What was the estimated sample size that was calculated for each group when the effect size was set at 0.4, power at $80\%$, and significance level at 0.05? Round your answer up.

::: {.graybox}

See \@ref(answers-7) for answers

:::

### Power analysis

Now, let's estimate the power of the study, given sample sizes (equal or unequal sizes), an assumed effect size, and a significance level.

**Example #1: Equal sample sizes**

A researcher was only able to obtain 41 participants in each group (sample size is equal for both groups). Given that value, she's interested in figuring out the potential power of her study (Note: This is still prior to completing the the study). She assumes the effect size will be 0.55 and sets the significance level at 0.05. 

- To calculate power with equal sample sizes in two group means, use the `pwr.t.test()` function from the `{pwr}` package, specifying sample size of each group (`n=`), effect size (`d=`), significance level (`sig.level=`), and type of *t*-test (`type=`):


``` r
####Calculating power, equal sample sizes
pwr.t.test(n=41, d=0.55, sig.level = 0.05, type = "two.sample")
```

You will see similar output as in the example for estimating sample size, but this time, you will be looking at the estimated power value (`power = `) based on the given inputs. 

**Example #2: Unequal sample sizes**

Now, instead, suppose the researcher had unequal sample sizes, 16 in one group and 21 in the other group. Given those values, she's interested in figuring out the potential power of her study (Note: This is still prior to completing the the study). She assumes the same effect size and significance level as in Example #1 (0.55 and 0.05, respectively). 

- To calculate power with unequal sample sizes in two group means, use the `pwr.t2n.test()` function from the `{pwr}` package, specifying sample size of each group (`n1=` and `n2=`), effect size (`d=`), and significance level (`sig.level=`):


``` r
####Calculating power, unequal sample sizes
pwr.t2n.test(n1=16, n2=21, d=0.55, sig.level = 0.05)
```

Notice that you didn't have to specify the type of *t*-test when you use the `pwr.t2n.test()` function. This is because the function is specifically for two-sample *t*-test with unequal sample sizes.

Again, you will see similar output as in the last two cases, except now you have `n1 =` and `n2 =` to indicate the two different sample sizes. Similar to Example #1, you will be looking at the estimated power value (`power = `) based on the given inputs. 

::: {.bluebox}
**POWER ANALYSIS**

<b>Purpose:</b> To calculate the power value given a particular sample size, effect size, and significance level. It is recommended that this calculation be done prior to conducting a study. Confidence intervals and effect sizes should be calculated after study results are obtained instead of post-hoc power calculations.
<br>

For more information about power, see this article: <a href="https://stats.idre.ucla.edu/other/mult-pkg/seminars/intro-power/">Introduction to Power Analysis</a>
Note that this article presents a lot of information but does a nice job of explaining power analyses.
<br>
<div style="border-bottom: 1px dashed black"></div>
<br>

For additional R resources on power analysis, see: 

* <a href="https://www.statmethods.net/stats/power.html">Power Analysis [Quick-R].</a>
* <a href="https://publicifsv.sund.ku.dk/~tag/Teaching/share/R-tutorials/Basic-statistics/Power.html">R-Tutorial: Power and Sample Size Calculation [Kansas University].</a>

:::
<br>

## GUIDED QUESTIONS {#g72}

##### Question 2
What was the calculated power when the sample size was 41, the effect size was 0.55, and the significance level was 0.05?

##### Question 3
What was the calculated power when the sample sizes were 16 and 21, the effect size was 0.55, and significance level was 0.05?

::: {.graybox}

See \@ref(answers-7) for answers

:::

## CHALLENGES {#ch7}

Let's explore how effect size, power, and significance level affects the estimated sample size. 

##### Question 4
Choose three other effect sizes (e.g., 0.1, 0.6, 1.2) to explore how effect size affects the estimated sample size (with power = 0.8 and significance level = 0.05 each time). 

##### Question 5
Choose three other power values (e.g., 0.7, 0.85, 0.95) to explore how power affects the estimated sample size (with effect size = 0.4 and significance level = 0.05 each time). 

##### Question 6
Choose three other significance levels (e.g., 0.01, 0.05, 0.1) to explore how significance level affects the estimated sample size (with power = 0.8 and effect size = 0.4 each time).

##### Question 7
Choose three other sample sizes (e.g., 10, 50, 134) to explore how sample size affects power (with effect size = 0.4 and significance level = 0.05 each time). 

##### Question 8
Choose three other effect sizes (e.g., 0.1, 0.6, 1.2) to explore how effect size affects power (with sample size = 40 and significance level = 0.05 each time). 

##### Question 9
Choose three other significance levels (e.g., 0.01, 0.05, 0.1) to explore how significance level affects power (with sample size = 40 and effect size = 0.4 each time).

::: {.graybox}

See \@ref(answers-chal-7) for answers

:::

